Syllabus - ECON 398
Spring 2026 (2025W2)
Jonathan Graves
2026-01-02
Table of contents
Key Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
What is this course about? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
What are you going to learn? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
What do I need to know before I start? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
How are you going to learn in this class? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
What do I need to buy for this course? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Textbooks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Hardware and Software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
How will I be assessed in this course?. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Assessment-specific Policies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Course Policies 11
What general policies govern this course? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
VSE-Specific Policies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Policy on Sharing Course Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
Policy on Academic Honesty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
￿ Policy on the use of AI learning tools ￿ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Policy on Academic Concessions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
My Policies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
Respect and Academic Integrity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
Missing classes or exams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
How to Contact Me . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
Piazza . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
OCELIA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
UBC Early Alert . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
Academic Accommodation for Students with Disabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
Conflicting Responsibilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
Copyright Notice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
Appendices 20
Project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
Assessment-level Learning Outcomes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
2
Key Details
• Instructor: Dr Jonathan L. Graves (Associate Professor of Teaching, VSE)
• Oﬀice: IONA 104 or via Zoom
• Oﬀice Hours: Mon/Wed 2:00 PM - 3:00 PM, or by appointment
• Email: jonathan.graves@ubc.ca
• Course Schedule:
– Lecture: Mon/Wed 3:30 PM - 5:00 PM @ BUCH A203
– Labs: Vary, check your schedule
What is this course about?
This course is designed to help you apply economics to the real world, through the “lens” of
what economists call causal modeling. The motivation for this approach is that in order to
understand the real world, we need to understand cause and effect. This principle
bridges the gap between the theoretical and practical aspects of economics, focusing on how
we can use econometrics and statistics to answer questions and evaluate economic models.
While the intermediate econometrics sequence (ECON 325, 326) focuses on the theoretical
and statistical properties of techniques and tools used in economics, this course focuses on the
proper application of these tools in a practical setting, with a view to helping you perform
your own, independent, research in courses like ECON 490 or 494.
In order to do this, we will focus on the problem of causal modeling: how do we answer
a question like “does A cause B”? This allows us to understand the relationships between
different econometric and statistical methods, and unpack the assumptions which are required
to interpret statistical findings economically. You will also learn a variety of novel methods
usedineconometricstoaddresscommonpitfallsassociatedwithstandardmethods,focusingon
the conditions and situations under which they are still useful to answer economic questions.
On the practical side, the conceptual side of the course is supplemented with extensive lab
time – both in the classroom and as part of a scheduled lab. Methods and illustrations are
connected to practical examples of how the concepts or problems manifest in real-world or
simulated data. You will have a chance to practice using statistical software, with the goal
of becoming comfortable enough to explore methods independently based on your own ideas
and experience. This is assessed through a series of assignments and lab quizzes, which will
give you feedback on your progress mastering both the practical tools and applying them to
developing a research project.
Thecourseculminatesinafinalresearchreportandandexamwhichallowsyoutodemonstrate
whatyouhavelearnedandgetsomeofyourfirstexperiencewritingaresearchprojectinwhich
you get to make decisions about the research direction. This serves as an excellent preparation
to capstone courses like ECON 490 or 494.
3
What are you going to learn?
The goal of this course is to help you become proficient in both applied and conceptual skills
related to applied economics. We’re less interested in building knowledge (although we will!)
and more interested in building familiarity with methods. These can be in terms of how
we think (conceptual, labelled with a C) or what we do (applied, labelled with an A). After
completing this course, you will be able to:
• Learning Outcome C1: understand causal methods and causality in economics and their
application to the real world
• Learning Outcome C2: analyze empirical methods and their real-world applications in
the context of the causal framework, with particular reference to bias
• Learning Outcome C3: interpret common econometric tools (such as linear regression)
in the context of causal models, and assess their pros and cons in answering questions
from a causal point of view.
• Learning Outcome C4: evaluate the connection between a theoretical economic model
and an empirical model, with reference to the causal nature of the questions both pose.
• Learning Outcome A1: understand the structure of economic data and how it can be
used to answer a properly formulated research question from a causal point of view
• Learning Outcome A2: employ an empirical method in order to answer a research ques-
tion from a causal point of view
• Learning Outcome A3: evaluate and communicate the results of an empirical analysis in
the context of a research question, with reference to causality
These might still be too complicated (after all, what the heck is a “causal model”); if you
want more detail, each of these outcomes is also divided into more basic outcomes, described
in Section , which are linked to the assessment and (estimated) weekly coverage of the course,
as outlined in the rest of the syllabus.
• MorebasicoutcomesarewrittenlikeC1.1; thisisbasicoutcome#1forLearningoutcome
C1; references in the remainder of this syllabus follow this convention.
What do I need to know before I start?
• You will need to be familiar with introductory micro and macroeconomics (i.e., ECON
101 and 102 at UBC).
• Whilemathisnotafocusonthiscourse, youwillneedtobefamiliarwithbasicstatistics,
especially expectations, populations, and averages. The most important concept in this
course is the conditional expectation.
– We will review this in the first week, but you should review this on your own if you
are not very strong with statistical analysis
4
• You also need to be familiar with math. This is mainly things like how to solve an
algebraic equation, simplify an expression, graph a function, or find the equation of a
line. There is no calculus required, but it can help.
• There are also no requirement to know programming or coding, but you should have
basic computer literacy (e.g. create a folder, move a file, rename a file).
How are you going to learn in this class?
We are going to use a combination of lectures and “hands-on” sessions for a total of about
five (4-5) formal class hours per week (including labs). For most weeks, 1.5 or 2 hours will
be spent in a traditional lecture format, and 1.5 or 1 hours will be devoted in “hands-on”
work applying ideas and techniques covered in lecture. This will be supplemented with one to
two (2) hours of lab time, where students will go in-depth using statistical tools or practicing
problem-solving.
• This time will also be used in some weeks to allow students to work on assignments with
a TA present for assistance (rather than completing them outside of class hours).
I don’t believe in strict schedules for this course, but I do have an outline of the different
modules for this course, and the (approximate) dates (see Table 1.)
• The midterm will be around week 6 or 7; after we finish most of the regression module.
I will announce a more specific date later in the similar
Table 1: Rough schedule
Lecture Topic Applied Topics Assessments
Module 1 Introduction (2/1) No labs Introductory
materials
Causality and potential outcomes Into to R
(2/1)
Module 2 Experiments I (2/1) Intro to Data
Experiments II (1.5/1.5) Descriptive Assignment 1
Stats
Module 3 Regression I (2/1) Regressions
Regression II (2/1) More regressions Assignment 2
Module 4 Difference-in-differences I (2/1) No labs Midterm (approx.)
Difference-in-differences II DD Models Assignment 3
Module 5 Instrumental Variables I IV Models
Instrumental Variables II Paper Prep Assignment 4
Module 6 Advanced Topics I Results
Advanced Topics II Results Assignment 5
5
Lecture Topic Applied Topics Assessments
Post- Report + Final
Class
What do I need to buy for this course?
You may not need to buy anything for this course.
Textbooks
Themain“text”forthisclassismypartiallyfinishedIntroductionto Causal Methodstextbook,
which is free on the Canvas website.
There are also two optional textbooks:
• (MHE) Angrist, J.D., & Pischke, J-S. Mostly Harmless Econometrics (2012)
– PDF version is free online (legally!); ~$60 paperback
•(MM) Angrist, J.D., & Pischke, J-S. Mastering ’Metrics. Princeton university press, 2014.
– This book is not free. It can be found online or in the UBC bookstore, and costs
about $35.
Hardware and Software
• You will need a laptop or tablet which can run an internet browser. If you do not have
one, they can borrowed from the Library or from UBC Arts ISIT on an as-needed basis.
Please let me know if you have any problems with this requirement.
• In this course, we will be using the statistical programming language R. There are
several different ways to use R – the simplest is via a web-browser. However, students
withmayalsowishtoinstallalocalversionontheircomputer. Youcanfindinstructions
for how to do this on Canvas. All of these software systems are free.
6
How will I be assessed in this course?
This year, I am trying something new with the grading for this course. Basically, this course
has two main parts:
• Examinations, which test your understanding of the concepts and theories taught in
course.
• Applications, in which you get to practice applying the concepts in the context of assign-
ments and a final project.
Since these two parts of the course are really quite different from one another, I am using a
technique called specifications grading to help you understand how you are doing in each
part of the course. Your final grade in the course will be based on:
1. 30% from your performance in the specifications table, below.
2. 70% from your exams (a midterm and a final). The final is worth 50%, and the midterm
20%, but if you do better on the final than the midterm, the final will count for 70% and
the midterm 0%.
In the table, your grade is determined by the lowest row where you meet all the requirements.
You can see a description of each requirement below. To get a specific value in each range,
I use your final exam grade to select a value from the range. For example, if you meet the
requirementsforanA,andyourfinalexamgradeisan85,yourfinalgradeforthespecifications
part will be 80+0.85×(89−80).
Table 2: Specifications Grading Table
Grade Assignments (E/P) Project Participation Applied Exam
A+ (90-100) 3/2 A 100% Pass
A (80-89) 2/3 B 90% Pass
B (70-79) 2/2 C 50% Pass
C (60-69) 0/4 Pass 50% Pass
D (50-59) 0/2 Pass 50% Pass
Assessment-specific Policies
Assignments
There will be 4-5 assignments (approximately 1 per unit).
• We grade each assignment on a 5-point scale. The grading rubric is explained on Canvas.
– A 3 or better is considered “passing” for an assignment. (P).
7
– A 4 or better is considered “excellent” for an assignment. (E).
• You get 1 chance to resubmit each assignment after reviewing the solutions.
Participation
This is all the random stuff we do that just makes the class work. It’s all graded pass/fail, so
the goal is just to complete them.
Project
See Section for details on how the project is graded.
Curving and Target Grades
The VSE has the following policy for 3nd year courses:
(cid:313) Note
Consistency in grading policies across VSE courses is extremely important: it is essential
that grades convey useful information, and that students perceive they are being graded
fairly across all courses. 300-level courses should have averages in the 70-78%% range.
This course usually does not require any scaling to meet that range, but I reserve the right to
adjust the final grades to reflect the diﬀiculty of the course and assessments. I may also adjust
the scores on an assessment to reflect the diﬀiculty of that particular assessment.
Extra Credit
Extra credit is not be provided on request, but some assignments will have opportunities for
extra credit. Additionally, depending on the semester and timing, there may be a few extra
credit or supplementary opportunities during class.
Re-Grades
Anyrequestsforare-gradeofanassignmentorexammustbemadevia the form on Canvas
within 7 days of when your work is returned.
8
• Any re-grade request must be via the form, and include a written description of the
problem with the grade and why the grade should be different. This helps to make sure
that grading is fair and consistent, since there is a written, objective, record of the issue.
I handle all such requests.
• Inthecasethattheerrorisnottrivial(e.g.thescorewasaddedupincorrectly)theentire
exam or submission will be re-graded. This is to ensure consistency of grading across
assignments, not to try to scare you – generally, if the request for a regrade is accurate,
your mark will increase.
There are no re-re-grade requests; if your request is denied, case closed.
Handing in Work
Several times this semester you will be responsible for handing in work. The deadlines are on
Canvas.1
• Late assessments will be penalized at a rate of 2% per hour late, rounded up to the next
hour.
– E.g., 10 minutes late would be 2% × (1 hour) = 2% penalty.
• AssignmentsmustbehandedinonlinebythedatepostedonCanvas. Theycanbeeither
typed, or written by hand then scanned in or photographed.
– You must upload a single PDF or DOCX file (not a bunch of JPGs or something
like that).
– It is your responsibility to ensure that any file you upload works.
Late Waivers
You start this course with two (2) late waivers. You can keep track of your waiver status on
Canvas by looking at the “Waiver” assignment, which indicates how many waivers you have
left. You may choose to use these waivers in the following ways:
• Use 1 waiver: extend the deadline for an assessments which is not (a) an exam or (b)
time-limited (e.g. must be completed before another assessment) for 48 hours. After
that point, normal late penalties begin applying.
1Important note: Canvas is a little sensitive about deadlines – it will say 11:59 PM usually, and it means
11:59:00 PM. If you submit something at 11:59:36, it will be marked as late – but don’t worry, we won’t
penalize you during that liminal minute.
9
To use waivers, add a comment in the Canvas submission indicating you are claiming the
waiver when you submit the assessment.
Note that late waivers do not replace the standard conditions for academic concessions (See
Section ). For example, if you get sick and cannot submit an assignment, you do not need to
use your waivers (although you can do that if you don’t want to bother getting an academic
concession).
10
Course Policies
What general policies govern this course?
There are a lot of different policies at UBC! In this section, I highlight some of the most
important ones for students in this class and give details for how to handle certain situations.
However, all courses at UBC (including this one) are governed by a core set of University
policies:
UBC provides resources to support student learning and to maintain healthy
lifestyles but recognizes that sometimes crises arise and so there are additional
resources to access including those for survivors of sexual violence. UBC values
respectforthepersonandideasofallmembersoftheacademiccommunity. Harass-
ment and discrimination are not tolerated nor is suppression of academic freedom.
UBC provides appropriate accommodation for students with disabilities and for
religious and cultural observances. UBC values academic honesty and students are
expected to acknowledge the ideas generated by others and to uphold the high-
est academic standards in all of their actions. Details of the policies and how to
access support are available here (https://senate.ubc.ca/policiesresources-support-
student-success)
To be clear: you are bound by all of the policies in the above link, regardless of whether I
clarify them elsewhere in this document. Give them a read!
VSE-Specific Policies
In addition the course averages above, the VSE has a number of specific policies which govern
all undergraduate courses. These are in this section.
11
Policy on Sharing Course Materials
(cid:190) Don’t Post Them Online
Please, please, don’t post my notes, slides, assignments, and work online. Or upload
them to random AI tools.
All the materials provided to you as part of this course are protected by copyright. All
assignment instructions, quiz questions and answers, discussion questions, announcements,
lecture slides, audio/video recordings, Canvas modules, and any other materials provided
to you by your instructor or in the textbook are for use only by students enrolled in this
course this term. Sharing any of these materials beyond this course, including by posting on
file-sharing websites (e.g., CourseHero, Google Docs) is a violation of copyright law and an
academic offence. Copying and pasting sentences from the lecture notes or the textbook (e.g.,
definitions) into for-profit software (e.g., Quizlet) is likewise a violation of copyright law, and
an academic offence. Violations of this policy will be treated according to the provisos of
the Code of Student Conduct. For further information about copyright law, please refer to
(https://copyright.ubc.ca/students/).
Policy on Academic Honesty
It is the policy of the Vancouver School of Economics to report all violations of UBC’s stan-
dards for academic integrity to the oﬀice of the Dean of Arts. All violations of academic
integrity standards will result in a grade of zero on the relevant assessment (exam, paper,
assignment etc.). Students who do not have a previous offence may have the option to en-
ter into a diversionary process with the Dean of Arts to resolve their misconduct (https:
//academicintegrity.ubc.ca/diversionary-process/). Any student who has a previous academic
offence will be referred to the President’s Advisory Committee on Student Discipline (PACSD)
(https://universitycounsel.ubc.ca/homepage/guides-and-resources/discipline/). PACSD may
impose additional penalties including: a transcript notation indicating that the student has
committed an academic offence, zero in the course, and/or suspension or expulsion from
the University. You are personally responsible for understanding and following the UBC’s
policies for academic integrity: https://vancouver.calendar.ubc.ca/campus-wide-policies-and-
regulations/academic-honesty-and-standards. A Canvas module has been made available you
for this purpose titled “Avoiding Academic Misconduct”. It is your responsibility to read the
materials in that module before submitting any work in this course. Speak to your instructor
if you have any questions regarding the standard for academic integrity at UBC and/or the
VSE polices on academic misconduct.
12
￿ Policy on the use of AI learning tools ￿
The specific rules for the use of AI tools are at the discretion of the course instructor. Those
rules might change over the course of the term as new technologies become available. Changes
tothoserulesmightchangethecontentofassessmentsandthewaythatyourworkisevaluated.
If no written instructions on the use of AI tools have been provided by the instructor, the use
of all AI tools is strictly prohibited in the course. Where the written instructions permit the
use of AI tools, that usage must be documented and attributed within your assessment(s).
Students are responsible for all factual inaccuracies that are created by the use of AI tools.
Please speak to your instructor if you have further questions about the ways in which AI
technology use is permitted in this course.
AI learning tools include things like:
• ChatGPT, Github Co-Pilot, Gemini, etc.
• This also includes some of the functionality of writing-assistant tools like Grammarly.
For these, you want to be careful. Basically, if it’s writing for you, it’s an AI tool. If it’s
just providing grammar or spelling suggestions, that’s fine. You can tweak the settings
to restrict this kind of functionality.
Using AI Tools on Assessments
As I said above, this is a really bad idea for the initial submission of the assignments.
However, if you use them, particularly in your resubmission, you must do the following:
1. If you have text that was based on output from a model, you should treat it as a
paraphrase and cite the model in the text.
2. See Section for a description of how to do this.
Using AI Tools on the Project
You may not use AI tools to write text or code for you. You can use AI tools to help you write
text or code.
• Basically, you should be thinking through a model’s output and re-writing it as you go;
just imagine the AI model is like the perfect textbook page you found on just the right
topic.
• A good way to do this is to use the model in a separate window from where you write,
and then never copy-paste.
• Use the model to help you do it, not do it for you. Think of it like a pair programmer,
or tutor, not a replacement for you.
13
If you do use a model, and you have text that was based on output from a model, you should
treat it as a paraphrase and cite the model in the text. See Section for a description of how
to do this.
• A common question arises when you used it to help debug code; just write a short
sentence explaining how it was used, and cite a specific instance of use.
Citing AI Tools
You should use Chicago-style referencing for AI tools. There are two main ways to cite a
tool:
1. For tools that include a link to the prompt and results, you should use use this URL in
the
• For instance, on ChatGPT, the link is provided in the “Share”.
2. For tools that do not include a link you should use the response to query.
For instance:
• Image Generated by ChatGPT, OpenAI, May 23, 2205, https://chatgpt.com/share/
68519b6f-ef3c-8011-9416-cff1f3aaccdf
• ChatGPT, response to “Explain how to make pizza dough from common household
ingredients,” OpenAI, March 7, 2023.
The Golden Rule
If you’re not sure just ask me.
Policy on Academic Concessions
Sometimes, things happen during the course of a semester that can affect your ability to
succeed. There are three main categories:
1. Medical – i.e. you got sick and missed class or a chronic illness got worse
2. Compassionate – i.e. a friend or close relative had something bad happen to them, or
something bad happened to you.
3. Conflicting Responsibilities – i.e. something happened in your personal life which is
affecting your ability to do the work, like childcare falling through
14
Youcanreadmoreaboutspecificexamplesandthewholepolicyat: http://www.calendar.ubc.
ca/vancouver/index.cfm?tree=3,48,0,0
Inallofthesecases, UBC’spolicyistoallowyoutorequestanacademicconcession. Mypolicy
is that all requests for academic concession should be handled through your faculty Advising
oﬀice. This is so that we can centrally track requests for concession and ensure they are fairly
administered; it also helps protect your privacy. You can find the Arts procedure here:
https://students.arts.ubc.ca/advising/academic-performance/help-academic-concession/
If you need a concession, you should immediately speak to Advising, who will follow-up
withmetohandletheacademicsideofthings. In-termconcessions, whichdealwiththingslike
missed assignments or deadlines, are handled usually by extending the deadline or adjusting
the final grading of the course (e.g. omitting an assessment). Alternative forms of assessment
may also be used if suitable and recommended by Advising.
You are also welcome to speak to me regarding your issue; I’m here to support you and help
you get through things and be successful. If you’re not sure if it’s something you should/could
get a concession for, I can also give you a quick sense of what Advising will likely suggest if
you’re unable to make an appointment immediately.
A request for an academic concession needs to be made within a “reasonable time-frame.”
Since this is ambiguous, I’m defining reasonable as within seven (7) days unless there are
extenuating circumstances which make meeting such a deadline impossible. If this is the case,
then a request should be made as soon as practically possible.
My Policies
I also have my own take on some of these policies.
Respect and Academic Integrity
It is very important that every student be treated with respect and given due courtesy by
others in the classroom environment. If you feel uncomfortable with the behaviour of another
person in the classroom, lab, or elsewhere, please bring it to my attention.
In addition, basic workplace etiquette is required of everyone. Treat this class like you would
a meeting with your colleagues at a (future) job. This includes:
• Coming on time, and not disrupting others when unavoidably late.
• Avoiding texting, playing with your phone, Facebook, email, chatting or other electronic
distractions.
15
• Raising your hand if you have a question or comment, and not interrupting others when
they are speaking.
Seriously disrespectful or inappropriate behaviour will not be tolerated, and may result in a
student being asked to leave the class or even withdraw from the course. All exams and sub-
missions in this course (including assignments) are governed by the UBC policies on Academic
Misconduct (http://www.calendar.ubc.ca/vancouver/index.cfm?tree=3,54,111,959). Cheat-
ing and plagiarism will be dealt with by the department and dean, and result in penalties as
outlined in the calendar (including, but not limited to, failure of the course or submission).
Academic Misconduct
The VSE requires that all incidences of suspected misconduct are reviewed by our academic
integrity oﬀicer; if you think I’m nice, that won’t help you!
Missing classes or exams
If you miss a class, it is your responsibility to cover the notes and topics you may have
missed. Forming a study group is highly recommended.
Exams will not be rescheduled, and no make-up exams will be given unless required by the
University Calendar:
• Since the midterm is (in a sense) optional, missing it for any reason (valid or otherwise)
will be treated the same, and the exam portion will be fully from the final exam.
• Ifthefinalismissedforavalidreason6See (supportedbydocumentation)asdetermined
byUBCAdvising,Iwillwriteafinalforyoutobearrangedatalaterdate,usuallyduring
the Standing Deferred period.
– It is your responsibility to apply for the exam and complete it.
• If the final is missed for non-valid reason, it will be treated as a zero.
Final exam dates are set by the university and are beyond my control. No alternative
dates will be provided, so refrain from making travel plans in advance of the dates being
announced.
How to Contact Me
My email jonathan.graves@ubc.ca is the best way to reach me.
Iloveemailsfrommystudents,butpleaseensuretheyarecoherent, respectfulandappropriate
to a business setting.
16
1. All emails should be prefaced with [Econ 398] in the subject line. Emails that do
not adhere to this guideline may not reach my inbox, and so you may not receive a reply.
I get a lot of spam emails, so if you don’t hear from me in a timely fashion (1-2 business
days), please send a follow-up email.
2. Include your full name and student number in the body of the email, so I know who you
are.
There is a limit to what can be discussed through an email, so longer discussions should be
taken up in my oﬀice hours. If appropriate, I may also post replies to student questions to
the entire student body. If, for whatever reason, you do not wish your question to be posted,
please indicate so in the email.
Piazza
To help people discuss questions and centralize communication, I’ve created a course Piazza.
You can join it by clicking on “Piazza”, in the sidebar to the right. One important thing to
keep in mind: you need to create an account, and Piazza is not hosted inside Canada. The
LTHub recommends the following:
The Piazza tool is stored on servers outside Canada. When you access this site
by clicking on the link through Canvas, you are being transferred to these servers.
In order to protect your identity, UBC obfuscates your user ID before it is sent to
the site. However, Piazza does require you to create an account on their servers.
While Piazza adheres to strict U.S. privacy regulations (FERPA), UBC cannot
guarantee security of your private details on servers outside of Canada. Please
exercise caution whenever using personal information. You may wish to use a
pseudonym to protect your privacy if you have concerns.
Participation in Piazza is optional; you don’t have to join or take part if you want, and can
always email me or your TAs questions as usual - but I will try to be active on Piazza, so I
encourage you to post your questions there, so other students can benefit from them!
OCELIA
We have a fancy new AI tools for help with this course. It’s based on some work people are
doing at UBC, and is a free implementation of the very good and expensive Claude Sonnet
4.3 model, fine-tuned on our course materials. Here’s what the team says about it:
OCELIA is an interactive learning assistant designed to help you connect with our
course readings. Each module includes a short set of questions that connect you
with the main ideas and key concepts from that week’s material. Spending about
17
15–20 minutes with OCELIA before your Wednesday discussion section will help
you feel more confident and ready to contribute to class.
Our class is one of the first to pilot OCELIA, which is being developed through a
Teaching and Learning Enhancement Fund (TLEF) project at UBC. Participation
is completely optional, but your feedback will help us make OCELIA even better.
As a small thank-you, students who regularly engage with OCELIA throughout
the term will earn a bonus 2% added to their final grade.
To sign-up for OCELIA, please create an account at ocelia.arts.ubc.ca using
your @student.ubc.ca email address. When you sign in, click the join button
and use the following code to join our class instance: XXX-XXX-XXX-XXX Students’
conversations and data will be saved by OCELIA and are accessible to instructors;
however, such access will be limited to troubleshooting potential issues with the
AI assistant.
It should be fun, and will definitely make the coding part of the course easier. I encourage you
to try it out!
UBC Early Alert
University students often encounter setbacks from time to time that can impact academic
performance. If you run into diﬀiculties and need assistance, I encourage you to contact me
by email or phone during my oﬀice hours, before or after class, or by dropping into my oﬀice
(location). Iwilldomybesttosupportyoursuccessduringtheterm. Thisincludesidentifying
concerns I may have about your academic progress or wellbeing through Early Alert. With
Early Alert, faculty members can connect you with advisors who offer students support and
assistance getting back on track to success. Only specialized UBC advisors are able to access
any concerns I may identify, and Early Alert does not affect your academic record.
• For more information, visit <earlyalert.ubc.ca.>
• For information about addressing mental or physical health concerns, including seeing a
UBC counsellor or doctor, visit <students.ubc.ca/livewell>
Academic Accommodation for Students with Disabilities
Academic accommodations help students with a disability or ongoing medical condition over-
come challenges that may affect their academic success. Students requiring academic accom-
modations must register with the Centre for Accessibility. The Centre will determine that
student’s eligibility for accommodations in accordance with Policy 73: Academic Accommo-
dation for Students with Disabilities. Academic accommodations are not determined by your
instructors, and instructors should not ask you about the nature of your disability or ongoing
18
medical condition, or request copies of your disability documentation. However, your instruc-
tor may consult with Access and Diversity should the accommodations affect the essential
learning outcomes of a course.
Conflicting Responsibilities
UBC recognizes that students may occasionally have conflicting responsibilities that affect
their ability to attend class or examinations. These may include: representing the University,
the province or the country in a competition or performance; serving in the Canadian military;
or observing a religious rite. They may also include a change in a student’s situation that
unexpectedly requires that student to work or take responsibility for the care of a family
member, if these were not pre-existing situations at the start of term.
Students with conflicting responsibilities have a duty to arrange their course schedules so as
to avoid, as much as possible, any conflicts with course requirements. As soon as conflicting
responsibilities arise, students must notify either their instructor(s) or their Faculty Advising
Oﬀice (e.g. Arts Academic Advising), and can request academic concession. Instructors may
not be able to comply with all such requests if the academic standards and integrity of the
course or program would be compromised.
Varsity student-athletes should discuss any anticipated and unavoidable regular-season ab-
sences with the instructor at the start of term, and provide notice of playoff or championship
absences in writing as soon as dates are confirmed.
Religious observance may preclude attending classes or examinations at certain times. In
accordancewiththeUBCPolicyonReligiousHolidays,studentswhowishtobeaccommodated
for religious reasons must notify their instructors in writing at least two weeks in advance.
Instructors will provide an opportunity for such students to make up work or examinations
missed without penalty
Copyright Notice
All lectures, assignments, exams, activities and course materials are copyright © Jonathan
L. Graves 2025, unless specifically noted. Please don’t post them online without my express,
written permission!
19
Appendices
Project
Papers are graded on a 5 point scale for each part
• 0 = not present or does not meet required standards
• 1 = does not meet required standard
• 2 = marginally meets required standard
• 3 = meets required standard
• 4 = meets or exceeds required standard
• 5 = exceeds required standard
A 3-4 is “good” while a “4-5” is “excellent” in general.
• The points are then combined according to the listed weights, and then considered as a
whole.
• Because the final consideration is for the paper as a whole, the final grade may not
exactly track the weighted average of the points for each section. For instance, a 4.1
might be a “good” or an “excellent” depending on the paper as a whole.
Part Description Weight
Background
Research Is there a clearly stated hypothesis? Is the hypothesis precise enough 5%
question and to answer empirically?
hypothesis
Motivation and Does the student explain the background in the area? Is the research 5%
background question well-motivated?
Data and
Methods
Data Is the data chosen appropriate? Is the source and type of data 5%
identification well-described?
and explanation
Summary Is there a clearly written table of summary statistics? Is it described 5%
statistics well?
20
Part Description Weight
Methodology Is the method chosen to answer the question appropriate? Is it 5%
selection explained well and clearly motivated?
Identification Does the student understand the required assumptions? Are they 10%
and causal discussed well?
assessment
Specification Is the specification explained? Is it well-described? Is there an 5%
selection(s) equation?
Results
Table of results Is there a clearly labelled table of results? Is it well-produced? Is it 5%
interpreted properly?
Interpretation of Are the results explained in the context of the research question? Is 10%
results the explanation correct?
Discussion
Analysis of Does the student explain the results in the context of the method 10%
results chosen? Are the strengths and weakness address? Are alternative
explanations address?
Quality of Is the student’s extension or additional analysis well-executed? Is it 10%
extension analyzed well? Is it motivated or connected to the research question?
Overall
References Is the paper properly cited? Are there suﬀicient references? Is there 10%
a table of citations?
Professionalism Is the paper professionally produced? Is it well-formatted? Are there 10%
typographical or formatting errors?
Grammar and Is the paper grammatically correct? Are there minimal spelling 5%
spelling errors? Is it clearly written?
Total 100%
You can see Canvas for the final rubric; this is just an example, but it will be very similar.
Rough Formatting and length guidelines:
• The font selected should be Times New Roman 11 point font.
• Pages should be formatted at standard margins (2.54 cm on all sides) and double spaced.
• Pages should be numbered clearly
• All papers should include a cover page, with the student’s name, student number, course
title, and date.
• Papers can vary in length; most will probably be 12 pages in length, but there is no firm
upper or lower bound on paper length.
21
Assessment-level Learning Outcomes
Learning Outcome C1:
• C1.1 Describe cause and effect in economic and philosophical terms
• C1.2 Compare causation and correlation in applied situations
• C1.3 Construct examples of causation and correlation
• C1.4 Describe an idealized experiment including the roles of treatment and control
• C1.5 Explain the fundamentals of quasi-experimental framework
• C1.6 Apply the quasi-experimental framework to applied situations
Learning Outcome C2:
• C2.1 Compare idealized experiments to their real-world quasi-experimental counterparts
• C2.2Explaingeneralizedempiricalcomparisonmethodsinthequasi-experimentalframe-
work
• C2.2 Describe selection bias in applied situations
• C2.3 Analyze comparison methods for potential selection bias
Learning Outcome C3:
• C3.1 Define linear regression, both simple and multiple
• C3.2 Explain the relationship between linear regression and comparison methods
• C3.3 Analyze linear regression methods in terms of the quasi-experimental framework
• C3.6 Explain difference-in-difference models and their key assumptions
• C3.7 Apply difference-in-difference models to the quasi-experimental framework
• C3.8 Explain regression discontinuity (or other advanced) models and their key assump-
tions
• C3.9Applyregressiondiscontinuitymodel(orotheradvanced)tothequasi-experimental
framework
• C3.10 Explain event study models (or other advanced) and their key assumptions
• C3.11 Apply event study (or other advanced) models to the quasi-experimental frame-
work
Learning Outcome C4:
• C4.1 Describe structure in economics and the relationship between theoretical and em-
pirical models
• C4.2 Determine the level of structure implicit in an empirical model
• C4.3 Define an empirical model and contrast with an empirical specification
• C4.4 Assess the quality of an empirical model for a specific situation
Learning Outcome A1:
• A1.1 Explain the different types of data and datasets used in economics
22
• A1.2 Describe the formulation of a proper research question
• A1.3 Collect and manipulate data appropriate to answering a research question
Learning Outcome A2:
• A2.1 Design an empirical model to answer a research question
• A2.2 Employ an empirical model to answer a research question in quantitative terms
Learning Outcome A3:
• A3.1 Interpret the results of an empirical model in the context of the research question
• A3.2 Critique an empirical model in the context of answering a research question
• A3.3Communicatetheresultsofanempiricalmodelinthecontextofaresearchquestion
23

